[PXCT-2031] UNO Q: add ai coding agents tutorial (#3000)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/02.uno/boards/uno-q/tutorials/10.ai-coding-agents/ai-coding-agents.md

author: Ernesto Voltaggio
tags: [UNO Q, AI, SSH, Terminal, OpenCode, App Lab]
hardware:
  - hardware/02.uno/boards/uno-q
software:
  - ide-v2
---

This tutorial covers how to use modern terminal coding agents, such as [OpenCode](https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode), Claude Code, or Codex, directly within the [Arduino® UNO Q](https://store.arduino.cc/products/uno-q)'s Debian Linux environment.

Unlike traditional remote editing, running an AI coding agent inside the board's shell allows the agent to inspect files, install packages, read logs, and test hardware-specific scripts in real-time. We will focus on OpenCode for this guide.

![AI Agentic development on Arduino UNO Q with OpenCode](assets/hero-banner.png)

## Required Hardware and Software

### Hardware Requirements
- [Arduino® UNO Q](https://store.arduino.cc/products/uno-q)
- A computer (macOS, Windows, or Linux) to connect from
- USB-C® cable (only required for the ADB-over-USB workflow)
- Network connection (Ethernet or Wi-Fi®) for the SSH workflow

### Software Requirements
- **OpenCode**, or another terminal AI coding agent installed directly on your UNO Q.
- SSH or ADB access configured on your board.

> *Note: For more details on setting up connections, refer to the [ADB tutorial](/tutorials/uno-q/adb/) or the [SSH tutorial](/tutorials/uno-q/ssh/).*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Note: For more details on setting up connections, refer to the [ADB tutorial](/tutorials/uno-q/adb/) or the [SSH tutorial](/tutorials/uno-q/ssh/).***
```

## Using OpenCode on the UNO Q

> [OpenCode](https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode) is an open-source coding agent that operates within a terminal interface, but also features a rich Web UI. By bridging it with the UNO Q's Debian system, you can drastically speed up hardware prototyping and system debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[OpenCode](https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode) is an open-source coding agent that operates within a terminal interface, but also features a rich Web UI. By bridging it with the UNO Q's Debian system, you can drastically speed up hardware prototyping and system debugging.

We will be using OpenCode in this tutorial, but further below you will also find instructions for installing other coding agents.
```

> ### 1. Connect to the Board

Reviewer: Nothing wrong with this section, but consider adding:
- Quick instructions to installing adb (then link to the full tutorial). This is not exactly needed, but makes the tutorial more "self-contained". I see this is linked just above, so it is probably fine
- **or** add that you can access the board via SSH through the Arduino App Lab. This might be the "easiest" route as it involves 0 configuration.

Feel free to disregard these comments, merely suggestions. Instructions look good otherwise.

Before using the agent, ensure you can access the board's shell. 

**Via Secure Shell (SSH):**
If the board is on your local network, access it using its hostname (e.g., `uno-q.local` or whatever hostname you configured):

```bash
ssh arduino@<hostname>.local
```

**Via ADB (Android Debug Bridge):**
If the board is connected directly via USB, use ADB:

```bash
adb shell
```

### 2. Install the Agent

> You will install the agent directly onto the UNO Q board. Open an active SSH or ADB terminal session to your board to begin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install an agent directly on the UNO Q board, begin by opening an active SSH or ADB terminal session to your board.

In the sections below you will find the installation steps for some of the most popular agents.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### OpenCode
```

Install OpenCode using its standalone bash script:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://opencode.ai/install | bash
```

> *Note: If you receive a `command not found` error after installing, your terminal hasn't loaded the new path yet. Simply restart your SSH session or run `source ~/.bashrc` (or `source ~/.profile`) to apply the changes.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Note: If you receive a `command not found` error after installing, your terminal hasn't loaded the new path yet. Simply restart your SSH session or run `source ~/.bashrc` (or `source ~/.profile`) to apply the changes.***
```

> **Alternative Agents**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Claude Code
```

If you prefer using **Claude Code**, you can install it via its standalone bash script:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://claude.ai/install.sh | bash
```

> Similarly, **Codex CLI** provides a standalone installation script without needing a package manager:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Codex CLI

**Codex CLI** is installed via a standalone installation script without needing a package manager:
```

```bash
curl -fsSL https://chatgpt.com/codex/install.sh | sh
```

> 

Reviewer: Consider adding antigravity CLI here as well. Not needed for first release though
